---
title: "Library"
---

Just a collection of random thoughts about books and papers that I read or that
I'm reading.

## Programming Rust

Do you feel like Rust is too complicated to learn? This is the book you should
read then. It covers not only the basics, but also some of the most difficult
topics of the language in a such a linear and comprehensible way that you'll
think Rust is not that complicated after all. Unfortunately, that's a lie. Rust
_is_ complicated, but that doesn't mean that learning it should be the same.
Highly recommended as a comprehensive introduction to the language.

## Learn you a Haskell for great good!

This was the first book that I read when learning Haskell. It's easy to read and
it presents all the basic Haskell features in a simple yet effective way. On the
other hand, to make it beginner friendly it barely scratches the surface about
what Haskell can do and it's not enough to write production ready Haskell.
However, it's probably the best starting point to learn Haskell.

Bonus points: lots of cool pictures and freely available online.

## Real World Haskell

I read this book after [Learn you a Haskell for great
good!](#learn-you-a-haskell-for-great-good) and I must say it's a pretty good
follow up. If the former focuses on the absolute basics, the latter really goes
into details and shows how to write good quality Haskell code. It's quite
outdated now, but if I can write any decent Haskell code I owe it all to this
book.

Bonus point: freely available online!

## Land of Lisp

It's a pretty good introduction to the world of Lisp. It's a pretty basic yet
comprehensive book that will guide you in the journey of learning Lisp and
functional programming.

Bonus point: so damn funny.

## Realm Of Racket

Heavily inspired by [Land of Lisp](#land-of-lisp) both in the contents and in
the style of writing. It's really fluent and easy to read, but unfortunately it
doesn't go into much details about advanced features of Racket(such as how to
build DSLs), but it's a really good guide to the whole Racket ecosystem
nonetheless.

Bonus point: so damn funny.

## The Nature of Code

I read this book mainly because I really liked some videos on YouTube by the
same author(Daniel Shiffman). At the time, I was interested in generative art
and recreative programming and I was searching for a good introduction to the
subjects and this book popped out. The contents strictly related to programming
were actually quite boring to me because they were teaching OOP which I think
was a bit out of scope. On other hand, it was eye opening because I realized how
much fun programming can actually be!

Bonus point: freely available online.

## Why functional programming matters

It's an _awesome_ paper by John Hughes that illustrates the basic concepts
around functional programming. Even though it's pretty old, it's one of the best
readings to understand the essence of functional programming.

Bonus point: it's freely available online.

## Purely Functional Data Structures

This was originally written as a paper by Chris Okasaki that was later turned
into a book. The purpose of this book is to show that it's possible to implement
efficient data structures using purely functional techniques. In particular it
focuses on how to exploit laziness to achieve good amortized performance which
is really mind bending to me. I cannot say I have fully understood it because
it's a bit hard to follow on the theory, but the overall algorithms are
expressed in a really clear and easy to follow manner.

Bonus point: the content is great!
